---
date: 7.10.2017
name: Death
tags: Death
image: death.png
featured: 1
---

I. Death is an inevitable outcome of our lives. It is an empirical
experiment with *practically* 100% yield [[1]](#ref1). Whoever lives
will die. Death is an event of termination of the physical existence
we know as "biological life". Nobody has ever escaped such a
termination of life --- the physical death.

Therefore, death is one of **the most reliable** empirical results. In
its persistence it exceeds many things one considers permanent: The
sun may not rise again tomorrow (induction problem), but we will die.

II. Death is *ultimately* connected with life. There is no death
without association with life. And although life can be thought of as
eternal (the Hereafter, Paradise), the death comes only when there is
a life, a form of existence. Thus, life is a *prerequisite* for death,
it is a *necessary* condition for it.

So "What is life?". It is death. It is not *completely* death, but it
is *necessarily* defined by death among other things, and since it
makes life cease, we argue it is the most *important* part of the
definition. What is your life? It is death. Perhaps, it is not the
first thing coming to one's mind when asked such a question.

> The suffering increases, and before he can turn around the patient
discovers what he already knew: the thing he had taken for a mere
indisposition is in fact the most important thing on earth to him, is
in fact death (Leo Tolstoy, Confession).

<img alt="Death: the most significant and reliable epistemological result"
src="/images/banners/death_full.jpg" width="100%" >

III. So do not waste your time thinking that some idea (technology),
some mere belief will make you unreachable for death. Rather most of
the ideas will vanish with time (another reliable empirical result),
but death will stay. Start thinking already now!

> We are all terminal, the only question is: How much time do we have?
> (popular movie).

---
You may find useful the following:
[Death: Practical conclusions and exercises](/essay/death-practical.html)

----

<a name="ref1">[1]</a> Due to the finite sample it can never reach
100% in theory, but in practice it does.
