---
date: 28.09.2018
name: The end of life
tags: Death
image: goal-and-end.png
featured: 1
---


### 1. Purpose vs. goal of life

The **purpose** of life is that meaning and significance that a human
being imparts to his life and that influence the way one should live
his life to attain **a happy life** (without defining the latter). In
fact, the definition of what constitutes a happy life makes difference
in what people consider their personal purposes in life. Example: my
purpose of life is to teach children, to heal people, to become one of
the best surgeons, to earn money for helping people in need, to become
a president.

The **goal** of (the entire) life, on the other hand, is the final
result of one's life, its outcome, the destination and result of all
life's activities. This result *justifies* a human life, motivates a
human being, and tells why and what he/she lives for, what he/she
tries to achieve at the end of life, what he/she *strives* for.

<a name="con0"></a>**Conclusion 1**: According to these definitions,
the purpose of life is about the process, the way we live our lives,
whereas the goal of life is for the end of it, its final result.

<a name="cor0"></a>**Corollary 1**: The goal, pursued in life, may
create a purpose in one's life. Similarly, the goal of the entire life
may create a purpose for the whole life.

<a name="rem0"></a>**Remark 1**: The goal is being defined here
broadly: This is a strife, desire, and yearn after some outcome that is
anticipated in the end of some activity. The purpose of life though
one should understand narrowly here, that is a purpose limited to this
life. At this point, we do not define purpose of (entire) life, as
this will be ultimately connected to the goal of life and, hence,
requires additional analyses, left for the future considerations. Note
also, semantically the word "purpose" may have plenitude of meanings,
including "goal" itself. That is why, we restrict the meaning of these
terms in the given context.

### 2. Importance of the end

The end of any activity is the most important as it motivates any
rational being, like humans. For any activity one has to determine
**why** he does that and **what** he is trying to achieve. And this
will be the reason one does something.

Why do you go to the university? I want to get a diploma. If you do
not get the diploma, the mission fails. The idea of getting the
diploma keeps you going towards the goal.

Why do you go to the university? I want to get smarter. If you do not
get the diploma, the mission can be still a success, because you want
eventually to get smarter (regardless of the means you take to measure
smartness).

Why do you go shopping? I want to have bread on my table. If you get a
new pair of shoes, the mission fails, because your goal was to get
some bread.

<a name="con1"></a>**Conclusion 2**: Deeds are made and measured by
their ends. Some result(s) is anticipated in the end of any activity.

<a name="cor1"></a>**Corollary 2**: Any activity ends with its goal
being achieved or being in principle unachievable (perhaps, that is
why linguistically "end" is equal to "goal" sometimes).

<a name="rem1"></a>**Remark 2**: Going outside to have fresh air "out
of sheer idleness" cannot be in essence without the end, because
"having fresh air" is the end in this situation. The sheer idleness
would be only irrational and possible for distracted persons. Same
with mere love for doing something, like painting, woodcarving,
playing football, there will be an end/goal for any such activity as
well. This goal justifies the activity, however irrational or personal
it is on a larger scale. This is true for the whole range of other
"instinctive" activities, the goal of which may not be present all the
time or in any particular moment of time in the head of men, but
nonetheless each such activity has its own goal. It is important to
note that the goal does not only exist in a very reasoned activity
(such as goals of a project or educational goals), but also in acts
undertaken on rather subconscious level. In the latter case, the goal
might be an emotional rush, inner feeling, instinct, aptitude or mere
caprice. This is all possible due to different *ways*, depending on
rational maturity, one justifies his activity. In laboratory
experiments, it has been shown that human beings tend to *justify*
their actions and name their reasons, even if these actions were
stimulated from outside, for example, using brain stimulation (one
lifts his arm after direct stimulation of his brain, yet the subject
*explains* why he lifted the arm). Therefore, we justify our actions
that are not even ours.

### 3. The end of life

The life's goal lies ultimately at its end or beyond,
[death](./death.html). Whether the goal is achieved or not cannot be
evident before death, that is while living. Therefore, what sometimes
is called the goal of one's life cannot be considered as such, *if it
is in principle achievable during one's life*.

To become a president cannot serve as the goal of your life, since if
you become a president, the goal is achieved, but you are still alive
and your life is now without this particular goal, hence it is not the
goal of your entire life.

<a name="con2"></a>**Conclusion 3**: The goal of one's life is
**beyond** life itself, at the very least is at its end,
[death](./death.html).

<a name="cor2"></a>**Corollary 3**: Note that the goal of life
*palpably* affects the way you live your life, that is your purpose in
life. However, the purpose in life affects what you achieve as its
goal only in belief. In other words, what you consider as a goal for
whole your life will perceptibly change the way you live. But one can
only believe that the way of living will change the ultimate result,
the goal of life (after death).

<a name="rem2"></a>**Remark 3**: Your life may have some smaller goals
which rather relate to the purpose of your life and which can be
achieved through life. However, these cannot be the goal...

### 4. The end of life and belief

1. A rational being is characterized by justifying any work he does
   with the goal he strives for.

2. The goal of life lies uncompromisingly beyond life itself.

3. Anything beyond life and its experiences belongs to the realm of
   beliefs and tenets, as there is no empirical evidence of anything
   beyond death.

<a name="con3"></a>**Conclusion 4**: A rational living being **must**
have beliefs about the ends life might have.

<a name="cor3"></a>**Corollary 4**: Empirical evidence is able to
necessitate beliefs.

<a name="rem3"></a>**Remark 4**: Leo Tolstoy in his
[Confession](/reading-club/confession-tolstoy) <a href="#ref1">[1]</a>
arrives at the similar conclusions epitomized by the following
questions, re-phrases of "the question of life", "the simplest
question lying in the soul of every human being", "the question
without which life is impossible":

> What will come of what I do today and tomorrow? What will come of my
> entire life? Why should I live? Why should I wish for anything or do
> anything? Is there any meaning in my life that will not be destroyed
> by my inevitably approaching death?

---

<a name="ref1">[1]</a> This work is especially valuable as it
summarizes human knowledge on the subject (perhaps, with the stress on
the Western-Christian thought and fairly extensive emphasis on the
Eastern traditions). Tolstoy was not merely speculating, because for
him this question of life became as vital as breathing and eating, and
sleeping.

