---
name: How to Read
date: 29.05.2017
author: Ilya Potapov
tags: Ruslim.Org
---

Our resource is primarily about reading, event to the extent we reduce
visual presentations to a minimum (sensational in most cases
misleading, devoid of true abstract vision).

We are not a blog. Not even close. Both by how often we get materials
ready and how much general we are. We are more like a textbook, a
reference guide that you have a look at and go change the world
(yourself in the first place) afterwards.

We are not new, we are reminders. Everything was already said or
thought somewhere in space and time, in one form or the other. Except
that people are forgetful. So, we urge others to go and find out by
themselves.

We are not very specific, so do not expect to find us easily on Google
(the very idea of a project like this is against modern informational
paradigm: you can create a blog on how to train a convolutional neural
network, or how to find your path to the Ope&#769;ra Garnier in Paris
to be sure they can find you). The specificity comes only when it is
necessary for the ultimate judgment on a subject.

We are boring to the most of the people, sometimes even irritating,
because we challenge the very eyes through which an individual sees
the world.

All materials are organized in the conventional categories: "Essays",
"Reading club", "Valuable". Essays represent the original works of the
authors, articles in Valuable are mainly references to external
resources with minor comments, and the reading club materials are essays
on books filtered through our mind processors.

We also have an additional classificator: so called "themes" or
"tags". These are kept to navigate the users and to refrain from
traditional categorization. One article may have many tags.

As materials grow, we collect them into smaller Tutorials. Thus, we
maintain several independent classification techniques.

You can read us from mobile devices, desktops, and in printed form,
depending on how difficult the material you are reading is.




